# Combined Restart / Shutdown Button for Raspberry Pi

A very simple systemd service for Raspberry Pi that provides a
software-controlled restart / shutdown button.

## Use

Default behaviour is:

* your Raspberry Pi will *reset* if the button is held for more than two
  seconds but fewer than five seconds;

* your Raspberry Pi will *shut down* if the button is held for more than five
  seconds.

By default, the software assumes the switch is connected to pin [BCM
27](https://pinout.xyz/pinout/pin13_gpio27#). Both the pin and the
timing can be changed in the Python source file.

## Requirements

### Hardware

* A Raspberry Pi (tested on a model 2B, 3B and Zero)

* A normally open, momentary contact button. I use surplus ATX power
  buttons (as used on desktop PCs), as they're cheap and come with a
  handy set of wires and header connectors. Virtually any button will
  do the job, though. Just make sure it's normally open (push to close).

### Software

* A Debian-based operating system that uses systemd (tested on Wheezy
  [RetroPie] and Stretch)
  
* the `python3-gpiozero` package to provide [GPIO
  Zero](https://gpiozero.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) (tested on version 1.4.0)

## Installation

### Hardware

Connect the button between GPIO 27 and GND. If you use an ATX power
button and a Raspberry Pi with a 40-pin GPIO header, connect it across
the seventh column from the left:

                -
    · · · · · ·|·|· · · · · · · · · · · · · 
    · · · · · ·|·|· · · · · · · · · · · · · 
                -

This shorts GPIO 27 (physical pin 13) to ground (physical pin 14) when
the button is pressed.
			  
### Software

The software is installed with the following commands:

    sudo apt-install python3-gpiozero
    sudo mkdir -p /usr/local/bin
	chmod +x shutdown_button.py
	sudo cp shutdown_button.py /usr/local/bin
	sudo cp shutdown_button.service /etc/systemd/system
	sudo systemctl enable shutdown_button.service
	sudo systemctl start shutdown_button.service

## Troubleshooting

Enabling the service should produce output very similar to:

    Created symlink /etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/shutdown_button.service → /etc/systemd/system/shutdown_button.service.

You can check the status of the program at any time with the command:
	
	systemctl status shutdown_button.service

This should produce output similar to:
	
    ● shutdown_button.service - GPIO shutdown button
       Loaded: loaded (/etc/systemd/system/shutdown_button.service; enabled; vendor 
       Active: active (running) since Sat 2017-10-21 11:20:56 EDT; 27s ago
     Main PID: 3157 (python3)
       CGroup: /system.slice/shutdown_button.service
               └─3157 /usr/bin/python3 /usr/local/bin/shutdown_button.py

    Oct 21 11:20:56 naan systemd[1]: Started GPIO shutdown button.

If you're seeing anything *other* than **Active: active (running)**,
it's not working. Does the Python script have the right permissions?
Is it in the right place? If you modified the script, did you check it
for syntax errors?

The output from `dmesg` will show you any error messages generated by
the service.

## Modifications

If you use a HAT/pHAT/Bonnet/etc. with your Raspberry Pi, check
[pinout.xyz](https://pinout.xyz/) to see if it uses BCM 27. If you do
need to change the pin, best to pick one that doesn't have a useful
system service like serial I/O or SPI. If you're using an ATX button
with a two pin connector, make sure you choose a pin physically
adjacent to a ground pin.

If you modify the timing, please ensure that you keep the shutdown
button press duration *longer* than the reboot one. Otherwise you'll
only be able to shut down.

## Notes

You should not need to reboot to enable the service. One machine of
mine — a Raspberry Pi Zero running Raspbian Stretch — did need a
reboot before the button worked.

The reboot code is based on the [Shutdown
button](https://gpiozero.readthedocs.io/en/stable/recipes.html#shutdown-button)
example from the GPIO Zero documentation.

This is not the only combined shutdown/reset button project to use
GPIO Zero. [gilyes/pi-shutdown](https://github.com/gilyes/pi-shutdown)
also does so, but pre-dates the implementation of the various hold
time functions in GPIO Zero.

GPIO 27 was used, as it's broken out onto a physical button on the Adafruit [PiTFT+](http://adafru.it/2423) display I own.

This is my first systemd service, and I'm still at the “amazed it
works at all” stage. The service file may not contain the ideal
configuration.

## Author

Stewart C. Russell — [scruss.com](https://scruss.com/blog/) —
[@scruss](https://twitter.com/scruss).

Writeup (with some pictures): http://scruss.com/blog/2017/10/21/combined-restart-shutdown-button-for-raspberry-pi/
